GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: American tragedies,
protests across the U.S., as
turmoil
over race and justice
shake the nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: our
Politics Monday duo take on how
racial tensions could shape
the presidential race, plus
looking ahead to vice president
picks and a big expected
endorsement.
GWEN IFILL: And we start our
series The End of AIDS in San
Francisco, where the country's
most ambitious campaign to
control the disease faces very
real challenges.
KENNETH GROSENBACH, HIV Patient:
I'm not really being too much on
the responsible end for
my meds or for my relationship.
I am just trying to make it day
by day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The nation is still
grappling tonight with a series
of tragedies, recent
police killings of black men,
and the sniper attack in Dallas.
It follows a long weekend of
crowds confronting police and of
mass arrests. Protesters are
taking to the streets across the
country. But in Dallas, the
anger is tempered by grief
for the five officers
killed Thursday night.
Police Chief David Brown said
today he is running on fumes.
DAVID BROWN, Dallas Police
Chief: My brain is fried. The
memorization it takes to run
a major city police department
just on a normal process day
with all things that happen is
overwhelming. So this
transpiring along with the
normal things that are
continuing to happen
in the city is
difficult at best.
GWEN IFILL: Doctors who tried to
save Thursday's victims grew
emotional at a hospital news
conference today.
DR. BRIAN WILLIAMS, Parkland
Memorial Hospital: This killing,
it has to stop, black men dying
and being forgotten, people
retaliating against the people
that are sworn to defend us. We
have to come together
and end all this.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile,
detectives are reviewing more
than 170 hours of body camera
video,
plus 300 witness and officer
statements. They're searching
for more background on Micah
Johnson,
the gunman who opened fire
during an otherwise peaceful
protest.
His parents told TheBlaze Web
site today that his time in the
Army Reserve wasn't what he
thought it would be. They say he
changed from a fun-loving
extrovert into a hermit. Johnson
died after a lengthy
standoff with police.
Chief Brown said today he has no
regrets about the decision to
kill him with a robot-delivered
bomb.
DAVID BROWN: We knew through
negotiations this was the
suspect, because he was asking,
how many did he get? And he was
telling us how many more he
wanted to kill. This wasn't
an ethical dilemma for
me. I would do it again.
GWEN IFILL: In Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, authorities arrested
nearly 200 protesters
demonstrating
over the killing of Alton
Sterling, captured on video last
week, apparently by two
officers.
Among those arrested, prominent
Black Lives Matter activist
DeRay McKesson, who was released
Sunday.
DERAY MCKESSON, Activist: The
only people that were violent
last Saturday night were
the Baton Rouge Police
Department. The protesters
remain peaceful both here and
across the country.
Again, I remain deeply
disappointed in the Baton Rouge
Police Department.
GWEN IFILL: Last night, Baton
Rouge officers in riot gear kept
protesters from entering
Interstate 110 with what
activists described as
heavy-handed tactics. Hundreds
also marched
over the weekend in St. Paul,
Minnesota, where picture was
shot to death during a traffic
stop; 21 officers were
injured Saturday night.
Today, city leaders said
they were caught off guard.
CHARLES COLEMAN, Mayor of St.
Paul, Minnesota: The folks that
were out there will all tell
you that the restraint that our
officers showed was second to
none, but at some point when
our officers are being bombarded
by concrete and rebar, to the
point where they are being
injured, we need to respond.
GWEN IFILL: But community
activist Robin Hickman said she
wasn't surprised at all.
ROBIN HICKMAN, Activist: We
don't have relationships with
our young people, our people who
are
just fed up, just have no hope.
That's what you're going to get.
GWEN IFILL: Demonstrators also
tried to block highways in
Memphis and Los Angeles. Back
in Dallas, police Chief Brown
had a message today for
protesters around the country.
DAVID BROWN: Become a part of
the solution. Serve your
communities. Don't be a part of
the problem. We're hiring. We're
hiring. Get off that protest
line and put an application
in. And we will put you in your
neighborhood and we will help
you resolve some of the problems
you're protesting about.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama will
travel to Dallas tomorrow for a
citywide interfaith
service, and meet with victims'
families. He will be joined by
Vice President Biden,
as well as former President
George W. Bush, and his wife,
Laura.
Later, Dallas officials
announced funerals for the five
officers will begin on
Wednesday.
We will return to Dallas and to
the newly recharged national
debate over policing and
race after the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's been yet
another deadly incident with
police, this time in Michigan.
Two bailiffs were shot dead
today at a courthouse in St.
Joseph, 200 miles west of
Detroit.
The local sheriff says the
gunman was killed as well. A
deputy was wounded, along with
one other person, and the
complex was put on lockdown.
GWEN IFILL: Republican
presidential candidate Donald
Trump called today for greater
support
for police, labeling himself the
law and order candidate. Trump
campaigned in Virginia Beach,
Virginia, and addressed the
sniper killing of the officers
in Dallas.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: America's police and
law enforcement personnel
are what separates civilization
from total chaos and the
destruction of our country as
we know it. It's time for our
hostility against our police and
against all members of law
enforcement to end and end
immediately, right now.
GWEN IFILL: Trump also talked
about killings of black men by
police, and said -- quote
-- "Everyone will be protected
equally and justly without
prejudice."
Meanwhile, Democrat Hillary
Clinton's campaign confirmed
primary rival Bernie Sanders
will
appear with her in New
Hampshire tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The race to be
Britain's next prime minister
ended abruptly today. Ruling
Conservatives formally chose
Home Secretary Theresa May to be
their leader after her sole
remaining rival, Andrea Leadsom,
dropped out of the running. May
called for unity, and
laid out her, priorities
starting with heeding voters'
wishes to quit the European
Union.
THERESA MAY, British Home
Secretary: Brexit means Brexit,
and we're going to make a
success
of it. Second, we need to unite
our country, and, third, we need
a strong, new, positive
vision for the future
of our country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: May will be the
second woman to lead Britain,
after Margaret Thatcher,
and she won't have to wait long.
After today's turn of events,
Prime Minister David Cameron
announced that he will
step down on Wednesday.
GWEN IFILL: In South Sudan, the
president and vice president
called for a cease-fire,
after five days of renewed
fighting between their forces.
Thousands fled the capital,
Juba, fearing the civil war that
ended last year is resuming.
Government forces attacked
a U.N. peacekeeping base and a
camp sheltering civilians. At
least two U.N. peacekeepers
from China and a local
U.N. staffer were killed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
will send another 560 troops to
Iraq. It's the second
increase in three months, and is
aimed at helping the Iraqis
recapture Mosul from the
Islamic State group, also known
as ISIS or ISIL. Defense
Secretary Ash Carter announced
the move in Baghdad today, where
he met with U.S. commanders and
Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: At every step of this
campaign, we have generated
and seized additional
opportunities to hasten ISIL's
lasting defeat. And with these
additional
U.S. forces I'm describing
today, we will bring unique
capabilities to the campaign
and provide critical support to
the Iraqi forces at a key moment
in the fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The troop
increase will bring the total
U.S. deployment in Iraq to more
than 4,600.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, upbeat economic data
helped Wall Street. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 80 points to
close near 18227. The Nasdaq
rose almost 32 points, and the
S&P 500 added seven, to
finish at a record high.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And national
basketball superstar Tim Duncan
is calling it a career, after 19
years with the San Antonio Spurs
and five championships. He's
considered one of the
greatest power forwards ever,
and has long been the face of
the franchise. With him,
the team never
missed the playoffs.
Also today, Jordan Spieth became
the latest top golfer to
withdraw from the Olympics in
Brazil, citing the Zika virus.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour": a black Dallas
police officer's message to
other police officers and to
President Obama; it's Politics
Monday, what to expect in the
week leading up to the
Republican nominating
convention; NATO's tentative
support for Ukraine
against Russia; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The past week has
underscored just how deep some
of the dividing lines are
in the country, and none more so
than when it comes to law
enforcement and criminal
justice.
African-American police are
walking an especially difficult
tightrope.
Hari Sreenivasan spoke this
weekend with Lieutenant Thomas
Glover. He's the president of
the Black
Police Association
of Greater Dallas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's
happened to this city in the
last couple of days?
LT. THOMAS GLOVER,, President,
Black Police Association of
Greater Dallas: I don't know.
I think it's symptomatic of a
move that may be sweeping the
country. It's symbolic of
people crying out to get the
people in charge to listen to
them, and I think we will have
to listen this time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: These were
your fellow officers. These are
people you served on the force
with,
your friends.
LT. THOMAS GLOVER: Yes. One of
them was a subordinate of mine
for about a year three
years ago, and I know him
and love him dearly.
And I think it's -- again, I am
extremely saddened by the fact
that five officers lost
their lives in the city of
Dallas, and it took this to get
attention to a problem that
people have been screaming about
for years. Violence toward the
police is not the answer.
It has never been the answer,
and it will never be the answer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are the
concerns of African-American
communities in the United States
right now
against police departments and
how the police are treating
them, are they legitimate?
LT. THOMAS GLOVER: Yes,
I think so, definitely.
I would be a fool to sit here
and deny that. I have been
pulled over and profiled. I used
to own a vehicle that had
22-inch rims. It was totally
black, blacked out with
dark-tinted
windows, and over the four-year
period that I drove it, I
probably got stopped a
half-a-dozen
times, and most of it was five,
six, eight blocks from my
church.
When you state that they are not
legitimate, people want to paint
you as being anti-police,
anti-law enforcement. Well, I'm
pro-police, I'm pro-law
enforcement, and I'm anti-police
misconduct. I am anti-police
mistreatment. I am anti-police
discrimination.
When there is misconduct, that
officer needs to be, I will use
the word crucified, because
when one officer, whether it be
in a small town in New Jersey or
a major city on the
West Coast or a mid-sized city
in Central United States,
anytime an officer commits
misconduct, it reflects what I
have to deal with, what almost a
million other police officers
have to deal with
around the country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you see a
video or videos like the ones
that came out this week,
as a member of the
African-American community, that
could have been a member of your
family,
what goes through you?
LT. THOMAS GLOVER: I'm
appalled that it happens.
I will be honest. I didn't cry,
the first one I saw that came
out of Baton Rouge. I
was very concerned. But the
second one that I saw in
Minnesota, I shed tears. I was
sitting
on the sofa in my house, and I
began to cry and boo -- just
like I knew the person, because
I knew it was symbolic of a
major problem that we have in
this country.
As an African-American police
officer, every day that you
serve, it's almost like you're
serving two masters. And I hate
to be so straightforward. Many
people expect us from the blue
side,
and I mean law enforcement, to
be quiet, to walk a tightrope,
and to just be indifferent.
On the other hand, in your
community, you are expected to
make a difference. I know
in all my years, I have heard
it, and now I have people
calling me saying, Glover, we
told you so. You see it? A guy
got shot in the back running
away from a police officer,
and he never would have been in
trouble had not someone covertly
recorded it on a cell
phone video.
And all I can do is say, yes,
you're right. We become adept at
doing both of them very
well. We do the police job
extremely well, and we live in
our community extremely well,
but, sometimes, and oftentimes,
when you talk to
African-American police
officers, it's
one of the most grueling and
taxing things that you can do as
a human.
And you saw it in a video that
went viral on Facebook this week
where the African-American
mother, who was a member of a
police department in Ohio
somewhere near Cleveland, a
seven-minute
video of her screaming. And she
is vehemently and emphatically
denouncing the fact that
she thinks very poorly -- and I
do, too -- of someone who
polices our community, whether
they be black, pink, purple or
green, and are so full of fear,
so full of fear, that
they mistreat people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When the
president comes, what do you
want to say to him? What do you
want him to do?
LT. THOMAS GLOVER: Mr.
President, do the right thing.
I'm telling you, as a 35-year
African-American
police officer, that there are
problems in the way we police in
the black community.
And I think you need to take
that charge, Mr. President, and
do whatever is necessary
to incite Congress to pass laws
that would allow us to rid the
law enforcement and the
police profession of
these type of people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we get
several views about this moment,
some of the dividing lines and
calls on all sides for change.
Kasim Reed is the mayor of
Atlanta. He has been dealing
with protests throughout the
weekend. The Reverend Jesse
Jackson, he's founder and
president of the Rainbow/PUSH
Coalition. He's one of the
country's most well-known civil
rights leaders. DeRay McKesson,
he's an activist co-founder of
Black Lives Matter. He was
arrested and released after
protests in Baton Rouge this
weekend. And Julian Zelizer,
he's a professor of history
at Princeton University. He is
the author of "The Fierce
Urgency of Now," a book about
the battles over civil rights
and the Great Society.
And we welcome all of
you to the program.
Let me start with
you, DeRay McKesson.
Listening to Lieutenant -- we
just heard from Lieutenant Tom
Glover in Dallas. How divided
is this country, based on what
you have seen there in Louisiana
over the weekend? Where
are we right now?
DERAY MCKESSON, Co-Founder,
Black Lives Matter: So, I don't
think that any of the division
or the tension is new.
What is new is that we're
finally having a public
conversation about this stuff.
So when
we think about the protests over
the last 22 months, they have
forced these issues of
race, racism, criminal justice
to the forefront, specifically
focused on police violence.
I'm hopeful that more police
officers and more police chiefs
and police unions will
come out acknowledging that the
culture of the police
departments are broken and that
there has to be change, that the
police don't get to operate
under a shadow justice system
and that we can live in a world
where the police don't kill
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mayor Kasim
Reed, you were dealing with
protesters, as we said,
in Atlanta over the weekend.
What did you see? And do you see
these conversations going
on across the country and in
your city making a difference
right now?
KASIM REED, Mayor of Atlanta,
Georgia: What I saw was an
expression of grief and pain
and frustration that
needed to be addressed.
And I saw that people's First
Amendment rights needed to be
respected. We had 15,000
protesters
since Thursday evening through
today. And I couldn't be prouder
of our law enforcement
officials, the Atlanta Police
Department and the Georgia State
Patrol. We have had peaceful
protests. We have had
minimal damage to property.
And I think that we have had
respect on both sides of the
conversation. And we have had
less than 25 people arrested. We
take great pride in Atlanta in
being the home of Dr.
Martin Luther King and a number
of other civil rights leaders in
the United States, like
Ambassador Andrew Young and
Congressman John Lewis. And
that's the way we approached the
protests.
And I think that it made all of
the difference in how the
weekend turned out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reverend Jesse
Jackson, from the perspective
that you have from going back
to the civil rights movement of
the 1960s, how do you look on
these protests of today
and how much progress do
you see having been made?
REV. JESSE JACKSON, FOUNDER,
Rainbow/PUSH Coalition: Well,
the protests are very
legitimate,
because we're saying
that we matter.
When Trayvon Martin is killed
and the killer walks away, when
Rodney King is beaten and
is own camera and those who beat
him walk away, when Garner is
killed and they walk
away, it's not just the act, but
the lack of consequences, when
violence occurs upon
our people. And
that's a pattern.
There's a combination here, not
just police. Police --
federation are police who
control
the discipline, as well as
states' attorneys and judges,
and now prisons for profit. The
whole judicial system has come
down on us and it's not right,
it's not fair. And the
protests are legitimate.
I will only say that violence
takes away our moral authority.
We have the moral high road,
and keep that high road.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Julian Zelizer,
you are watching all this as
well. You have written about
this
a great deal.
Do you see the country coming
together in any regard at this
point? Or do we still have
a long way to go
before that happens?
JULIAN ZELIZER, Princeton
University: We have a long way
to go.
We're in a very divisive,
political moment right now, and
one of the possibilities is
that the response to this is not
to find solutions to the
problems of policing that we
have seen,
but to move in a very different
direction. 1968, Richard Nixon
pushed the country toward
law and order, rather than
reforming the criminal justice
system, and there is a
possibility
we see the same
thing happen today.
So I think the divisions are
real, they're deep, and I think
it's not unlike some of
what we saw in the late '60s.
JUDY WOODRUFF: DeRay McKesson --
go ahead. Were you just
speaking?
REV. JESSE JACKSON: I was about
to make a point here that...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reverend
Jackson, go ahead.
REV. JESSE JACKSON: ... it's
not just policing poverty.
We would ask for a White House
conference on policing, but also
on poverty, the racial
disparity and the plan for
reconstruction. Changing -- if
you have a size 10 shoe in
a size 8 foot, it's not a
conversation. You need a shoe
that fits the foot.
Our poverty is twice the
national average, number one
infant mortality, number one in
short life expectancy, lack of
access to capital and industry.
We have not recovered from the
economic crisis yet. We
need reconstruction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me use
that as an opportunity to turn
back to DeRay McKesson
and ask you, what is it that the
Black Lives Matter movement, as
you see it, is looking
for?
Are you looking for --
specifically for police reform,
and where does it fit on the
spectrum
between that and the much bigger
goals that Reverend Jackson is
talking about?
DERAY MCKESSON: So, Reverend
Jackson is right that there are
so many things that we need
to focus on. I think that what
is true is that what got people
on the streets in August
of 2014, when the movement was
born, was the death of Mike
Brown.
And that -- there is something
visceral about the violence of
the police, that it continues
to be something that people
organize around, and that is
central. That does not mean it's
the only thing that people focus
on. People are doing incredible
work around making sure
that we close the racial wealth
gap, on education, and that work
continues.
And that's the beauty of the
movement in a sense, is that it
wasn't -- there's no one,
two, or three founders of the
movement. I'm certainly not a
founder of any space, but
I am one of many people doing
work in the space and we see so
many people right now
finding their voice. We saw the
protesters in Atlanta
beautifully raising issues and
being really clear about
solutions, and in Chicago, Baton
Rouge, and so many other places.
So, I think it is rooted in the
violence of the police right
now, because the police kill
nearly three people -- have
killed nearly three people
already in 2016. But there are
people doing really good work
around the racial wealth gap and
education and so many other
things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mayor Reed, what
we're hearing there is that the
goals -- that there's a
long list of goals of many
different kinds, and that -- I
think we're hearing about a
movement that's more
decentralized than what we saw
during the civil rights
movements of
the '60s.
Does that mean it's more likely
to be successful or not?
KASIM REED: I think it's likely
to be successful because,
despite the fact that the
country
is in a tough time, we continue
to make forward movement.
So, for example, in the city of
Atlanta, we have had our
officers have bias training.
So one of the issues that Black
Lives Matter's members and
others have raised is this bias
that many of us are
frequently unaware of.
The population of our police
department really mirrors our
city's population. That's
another
issue that has been repeatedly
raised. Last year, in 1.6
million interactions with the
public, our police officers
fired their weapons less than 10
times.
Many of the changes and reforms
that we have experienced is
because we are actually
listening
to the protesters and to others
and trying to respond. We have a
citizen review board
with subpoena power. So the
point I'm making is, is that it
is a very tough time, but
leaders
who are forward-thinking and
want America to be a better
version of itself are listening
very closely and trying to move
without having to respond to a
terrible tragedy.
(CROSSTALK)
REV. JESSE JACKSON: I'm
sorry. Forgive me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just --
just a second, Reverend Jackson.
I want to ask Julian Zelizer, is
there enough listening going on,
though? Because there's
a lot of conversation over the
weekend about there are
different conversations going on
in the white community and the
black community and together,
but is there enough talking
going on among people who may
disagree and may come together
as a result of what they're
hearing from each other?
JULIAN ZELIZER: Well, listen,
the Black Lives Matter movement
has made incredible progress
in bringing these issues on to
the table, combined with the
realities people see through
the social media.
But we do live in a very
fragmented political
environment, where, before this
issue, people
don't listen to each other. They
watch media that reflects their
own positions, and they
even commute -- have communities
with like-minded individuals,
and the parties are very, very
polarized.
So I do worry about some of the
limits that the movement might
have. I will just add the
Kerner Commission in 1968 put
forward a lot of these issues,
not only policing, but
unemployment
and segregation. The black power
movement put these issues on the
table. And, unfortunately,
our political systems didn't
respond. So, that's a warning
for what could happen today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask
each one of you in just a few
seconds, how much -- what do
you want to hear from President
Obama tomorrow when he goes to
Dallas and how much difference
will that make?
Reverend Jackson?
REV. JESSE JACKSON: First of
all, the killer didn't come out
of the civil rights movement.
That was a strategy alien
to the way we functioned.
Secondly, we need some real
renew -- there is a date,
November the 8th. And Trump has
thrown down his gauntlet, saying
law and order, trying to imitate
Nixon.
We must choose reconciliation
over retaliation and revenge. I
hope President Obama will
address,
underline the police issue, the
issue of jobs, jobs training and
economic reconstruction
and the race disparity. Race
disparity is real. It is real.
And it's growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
are, unfortunately, out of time.
We hope to come back to all of
you in the very near future.
Reverend Jackson, Mayor Kasim
Reed, DeRay McKesson, Julian
Zelizer, we thank you all.
JULIAN ZELIZER: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Public debates
automatically turn political, as
the presidential campaigns enter
their pre-conventional stretch.
Joining us, as they do every
Monday, to discuss the issues
that are shaping voters' choices
are Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
Let's compare and assess what we
have seen happen in the last
several days. It's been
an amazing period in our nation,
and we have seen the way Donald
Trump handled it. We saw
the way Hillary Clinton handled
it. How do you compare those two
things, Amy?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well, I think how I
think there is how they dealt
with it in the immediate
aftermath, which was both were
very sort of nonpolitical. Both
called for unity. Both called
for sort of ratcheting down the
rhetoric.
Today, though, you saw Donald
Trump talk a little bit more
about this. And if you had
to pick the difference of how
Donald Trump is talking about
this and Hillary Clinton
is talking about this, she made
a talk at a church this weekend.
She talked about bringing
America together. That's been
really the theme of her campaign
is bringing Americans together.
What Donald Trump talked about
is how law and order is what
really -- is much more central
to his campaign. So one is
talking about the togetherness
of Americans. The other is
saying
the only way to keep us from
falling apart is to have strong
law and order.
It sounded very reminiscent of
another Republican presidential
candidate from 1968, which
was...
GWEN IFILL: Richard Nixon.
AMY WALTER: ... Richard Nixon.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, it's not
insignificant where Hillary
Clinton chose to make these
comments.
She was speaking at the
quadrennial Conference of
African Methodist Episcopal
Church.
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Obviously, we saw
Mother Emanuel AME Church in
Charleston was a member of that.
So, she was speaking to an
audience which got this.
At the same time, I was struck
when she said something like, we
have to learn, as white
people, need to start listening
to black people, which shouldn't
be a shocking idea, but somehow
it was taken as a big moment.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
And the other interesting thing
about that is, it's not the
first time she's talk about
that. It's not the first time
she's talked about talking to
white people about their
privilege or about listening,
about walking in the shoes of
other people.
This has actually been a theme
of her campaign for months now,
but, somehow, in that place,
in this moment in time, it had a
different resonance than it's
had before. It got noticed.
GWEN IFILL: And, of course,
tomorrow, President Obama goes
to Dallas and we get to see him.
I hate the term
consoler-in-chief again, because
he has to be that so often, but
that's what
we see happen again.
Let's talk about what else is on
the candidates' minds right now,
which is, who's going to
run with them? Who is going to
be on their ticket? We have
conventions coming right up.
And are we any
closer to knowing?
AMY WALTER: Do we have any idea?
GWEN IFILL: Next week.
I'm terrible when it comes to
predicting who the vice
president is going to be. I'm
always
wrong about this. And part of it
is, it's very difficult to
assess from here, and partly
because we get so caught up in
the poll and the strategy and
who's going to fill the gaps.
And at the end of the day, this
is about -- I think sometimes
more important than anything
else is the rapport
-- the rapport.
GWEN IFILL: The rapport. Yes.
AMY WALTER: The rapport -- thank
you -- the chemistry that they
have between each other.
I think that that comes across
and it's even more important in
this day and age, where
they're going to be together and
shot at every single angle,
live-streamed, Snapchatted,
on television together. That is
going to come across and become
very important.
The other piece, as we're seeing
now, that these candidates are
literally trying their
V.P.s out on the trail, on
television. Who succeeds and who
fails under the sharp microscope
and under the spotlight?
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump now
today, he appeared with Chris
Christie. Not too long ago, he
was with Mike Pence from
Indiana. He's basically trotting
them all out.
Does Hillary Clinton do the same
thing, or is she just waiting to
see what he does?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, on Thursday,
she is campaigning with Senator
Tim Kaine of Virginia. And they
will be in Northern
Virginia together. He is...
GWEN IFILL: It won't be the
first time she's done that.
TAMARA KEITH: And if you're
looking at the wager lists, he's
near the top. Who knows
if he's actually at the top of
her list, but in terms of the
parlor game that we're all
now playing, because that's what
you do this time of year, he's
near the top of the list.
Other people on that list are
Elizabeth Warren, the senator
from Massachusetts, who Hillary
Clinton campaigned with, and
also Tom Perez, the labor
secretary, and probably five
other
people who I'm not mentioning.
GWEN IFILL: That's what's
happening with Republicans.
They're putting out a whole list
of people
who may or may not be vetted
right now. But are there other
goals besides that for this
convention coming up?
AMY WALTER: Well, the most
important goal, of course, for
Donald Trump is to make it
at least appear as if there's
some unity in this party.
And the first hurdle he has to
overcome is this week as the
rules committee gets together.
There's talk about that there's
going to be something of a never
Trump moment, where they
can unbind delegates. I don't
think that's going to happen. In
fact, I am pretty convinced
that's not going to happen.
But until that is actually over,
the talk will not die down. Once
he overcomes that
hurdle, the next is, what does
this convention look like? There
obviously are a lot who aren't
going to show up, including the
last sitting Republican
presidents.
GWEN IFILL: The current
Republican governor.
AMY WALTER: Or the current
Republican governor, or the 2012
nominee for the party.
But I don't think that that's
the bigger problem for Donald
Trump. I think it is -- his
challenge
has long been he's done very
well in a primary that was very
narrow focused to a certain
group of voters. He has yet to
make the case to a broader group
of voters. Can he do that
in this convention?
This is his second chance that
he's getting, when people are
tuning in to see, has Donald
Trump turned the corner from
primary candidate to general
candidate?
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow in New
Hampshire on the Democratic
side, Bernie Sanders finally
shows
up and decides to, we think the
E-word will be used, endorse
Hillary Clinton.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. Yes, the word
from Democratic sources with
knowledge of the negotiations
between the Sanders campaign and
the Clinton campaign is that
this is, in fact, an endorsement
event.
Bernie Sanders and Hillary
Clinton will be campaigning
together at a rally in
Portsmouth,
New Hampshire. This has been
weeks and weeks in the making.
One source tells me that the
campaign manager for Hillary
Clinton and the campaign manager
for Bernie Sanders have been
either texting or talking on the
phone every single day since
June 7.
GWEN IFILL: Cute.
That's so high school.
But what about the platform
committee? They actually met,
and Bernie Sanders got a couple
of things.
TAMARA KEITH: Bernie Sanders got
a lot of what he was looking
for. The platform includes
a $15 minimum wage, for
instance. Also, over the last
week or so, Hillary Clinton's
made
a number of policy concessions.
She's moved closer to Bernie
Sanders. She made some
announcements on health care, as
well as college affordability.
So Bernie Sanders, you know,
this endorsement isn't for free.
Bernie Sanders has been pushing
Hillary Clinton, and you can
expect that to continue beyond
tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: To the
extent platforms matter.
AMY WALTER: Does a platform
matter, which they don't,
although I think -- good for
him.
He got a lot of what he wanted.
The most fascinating thing about
this primary has not simply been
how Sanders has pushed
Hillary Clinton. I think it's
been twofold, one, how far she
has moved from the other
Clinton's legacy. Right. She is
really not running as a Bill
Clinton part two. She's
running as a Hillary Clinton.
And she did something that Jeb
Bush and others didn't do, which
is she moved where the party
went. Jeb Bush decided to stay
where his party was in the early
21st century.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
We will see you wherever we are
at this time next week, waiting
probably still for more
shoes to drop.
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report, Tamara Keith of NPR,
thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour," we
launch our series The End of
AIDS, starting with a look
at an ambitious initiative
in San Francisco.
But, first: We reported all last
week on the fault lines between
Russia and the West over
the Russian-backed war in
Ukraine and Moscow's new,
aggressive posture against NATO.
Leaders of the North Atlantic
Treaty alliance met over the
weekend in Warsaw, and we go
to John Yang for an update.
JOHN YANG: With us now to
discuss what came out of the
NATO summit and the future of
the
alliance is Esther Brimmer. She
has served in various roles at
the State Department.
Most recently, she was assistant
secretary of state for
international organization
affairs.
She's now with the Council on
Foreign Relations and teaches at
George Washington University.
Esther Brimmer, thanks
for joining us.
What would this -- this summit,
the president said it was the
most important moment for
NATO since the end of the Cold
War. What were the big decisions
that came out of this meeting?
ESTHER BRIMMER, Former State
Department Official: Indeed,
this was an extremely important
summit.
This was an opportunity for the
leaders to demonstrate that
there was real support and
backing, concrete actions to
support the Eastern allies of
the alliance. What we saw were
that
the United States and other
important leaders within the
alliance are showing that they
will commit troops
again to Europe.
We're seeing the deployment of
battalions in those countries
that are most threatened
by the new tensions with Russia.
And it meant that the alliance
still matters, despite the
turbulence created by the Brexit
vote in the European Union.
JOHN YANG: Let's take
those one by one.
First of all, the troops being
sent to Eastern Europe, troops
once again being deployed by
NATO to deter Moscow, this is
sort of a return to the original
purpose of the alliance.
ESTHER BRIMMER: Well, indeed.
The alliance is, of course, both
a political and a military
alliance to defend the territory
of the NATO allies. And, once
again, we see that we need to
have a military presence in
Europe increased. As we know,
there has always been a U.S.
presence within Europe, which
was happily reduced after
the end of the Cold War.
However, now we see that
particularly the Baltic states
and others are concerned about
their security, recognizing the
threats made by Russia against
those non-NATO countries
to their east. Importantly, we
see that, though, this is a
multilateral commitment. We see
that countries of four nations
will lead the effort to station
rotating battalions in the
eastern part of the
NATO countries.
So, again, the United States,
but other countries, too, are
part of the response to show
that
the alliance as a whole is
committed to the territories of
those countries most under
pressure.
JOHN YANG: You spoke also about
the British decision to leave
the European Union. What's
that done to NATO?
ESTHER BRIMMER: Indeed.
As we know, that there are
important institutions in the
transatlantic relationship. The
North
Atlantic Treaty alliance, NATO,
has always been the underpinning
of that relationship.
But the European Union has an
important role in other types of
security, including border
issues and others.
And so the relationship between
those countries are also part of
transatlantic security. The
United Kingdom is really the
lynchpin. They're both members
of NATO and members of the
European
Union. They have an important
role to play. But they have a
sovereign choice about what
they were going to do. The vote
for Brexit means that there is a
greater interest, I
think, in the United Kingdom in
demonstrating their support for
the transatlantic alliance
and showing that they want to
continue to play an important
role as a key nation within
the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.
JOHN YANG: And within Europe,
could NATO emerge as the
unifying force if E.U. is -- if
Britain
leaves the E.U.?
ESTHER BRIMMER: They really play
two different roles, that the
NATO alliance is a military
alliance. Its job is to provide
for the defense of the allies
who are part of it, yet it has
a complementary role
to the European Union.
But NATO will also continue to
have its political role.
Ultimately, it is an alliance of
values
based on the political values we
share. The United Kingdom will
be an important part of
expressing and defending
those values.
And from what we see, they will
continue to want to demonstrate
their leadership in the
alliance to demonstrate their
support for the transatlantic
relationship.
JOHN YANG: With the economic
uncertainty of leaving the
European Union, is it possible
that Great Britain will no
longer keep up its -- it's one
of the few countries that
is meeting its obligation in
defense spending among NATO
members. Is there a danger that
that is going to stop?
ESTHER BRIMMER: There will be a
great deal of attention toward
seeing whether the United
Kingdom will be able to maintain
their financial commitment to
the alliance.
As you have indicated, that of
the 28 members of the alliance,
only four have met the
commitment
that was made, ironically, at
the last summit, which was held
in the United Kingdom in Wales,
at which the allies committed to
paying 2 percent towards their
-- towards the alliance.
Only four countries meet that.
The United Kingdom is one of
them. Although the Cameron
government did institute
significant
reductions in public spending in
recent years, they did recently
meet the 2 percent standard.
I think most allies are hoping
they will continue to do so, but
they will be under economic
pressure. It will be a concern.
JOHN YANG: More interesting
days ahead for Europe.
ESTHER BRIMMER: Indeed.
JOHN YANG: Esther Brimmer,
thanks for being with us.
ESTHER BRIMMER: Thank
you very much.
GWEN IFILL: Now we kick off a
special series about efforts to
try to end the AIDS epidemic.
Leaders and researchers from
around the globe will be meeting
at the International AIDS
Conference in South Africa next
week. One major focus, how to
stop the epidemic.
But with no vaccine or cure in
sight, how likely is that? This
week, we're looking at
efforts around the world.
We start in San Francisco, where
we have followed people for the
past six months.
Correspondent William Brangham
and producer Jason Kane reported
this series, with the
support of the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: San
Francisco's gay pride events
went off this summer like they
usually
do, loud and colorful
and celebratory.
But there's additional reason to
celebrate. San Francisco, one of
the cities where the
AIDS epidemic first emerged, and
one that suffered terribly from
it, has now launched
the country's most ambitious
campaign to control it.
It's called Getting to Zero.
Luis Canales is a living example
of that campaign. Canales is
HIV-positive. He got infected
having
unprotected sex with another man
three years ago. But -- and this
is one of the linchpins
of San Francisco's effort --
Canales was tested and then
started on HIV treatment
immediately
after diagnosis.
LUIS CANALES, AIDS Patient: Yes,
right away. And I think it was
the next day, I came in
and started my meds.
DR. STEVEN DEEKS, University of
California, San Francisco: That,
as a physician is my
goal, to keep people on
therapy for their own good.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Steven
Deeks is Canales' doctor.
DR. STEVEN DEEKS:
Luis, how you doing?
LUIS CANALES: Pretty good.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This
approach is called Rapid.
And Deeks says, the sooner the
virus can be stopped with
antiretroviral drugs, the
better,
but it's not just
for the patient.
DR. STEVEN DEEKS: From a public
health perspective -- and I
think this is what's really
driving
a lot of interest in the RAPID
program -- someone's on therapy,
they can't pass the virus to
other
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Diane
Havlir of U.C. San Francisco
pushed the city to embrace RAPID
treatment years before other
cities did. She's also one of
the architects of the entire
Getting
to Zero plan.
She says the idea that treatment
should wait because of cost, or
side effects, or fear
people won't stick
with it is outdated.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR, University of
California, San Francisco: If
you have heart attack, you
do need to take medicines for
your heart, in most cases for
life. We don't say, how
do you feel about this? Do you
want to go home? We say, you
need to start these medicines
now. This is a serious
condition. It's the same with
HIV.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Widespread
testing and treatment for HIV is
considered the single best way
to curtail this epidemic.
Treatment prevents infected
people from progressing to AIDS,
and it reduces the likelihood
that
they will infect others. The
Getting to Zero campaign wants
to cut those new HIV infections
in the city by 90 percent by
2020. That would mean cutting
them from 300 a year now down
to about 30. They also want to
cut HIV deaths by a similar
percentage, from about 150 a
year today down to just 15.
They want to get both down to
zero by 2030. Of course, the
best way to stop HIV is to
stop people getting infected in
the first place, so San
Francisco is aggressively
promoting
its prevention strategy.
Jason Lloyd is a 41-year-old
gay man in San Francisco.
MAN: Your first and last name?
JASON LLOYD, San
Francisco: Jason Lloyd.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He doesn't
have HIV. And to stay that way,
back in January, he was
about to start taking what's
called PrEP, pre-exposure
prophylaxis. It's a daily dose
of the drug Truvada that will
greatly reduce his chance of
infection if he's exposed to
HIV.
JASON LLOYD: There is always in
the back of my head when I go to
get tested, is this going
to be -- is the test going to
come back positive? Because I do
have risky activity, although
it might be low-risk,
still risky.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Truvada was
approved as a prevention tool by
the FDA in 2012. Despite
its proven ability to prevent
HIV, it's been very
controversial, and it hasn't
been widely
embraced elsewhere. Some fear
those who take it will engage in
riskier behavior, though
there's very little
evidence of that occurring.
Right now, an estimated 6,000
people in San Francisco are
taking Truvada for HIV
prevention,
and Jason Lloyd is
joining their ranks.
JASON LLOYD: And so I will start
taking it tonight. So, we will
see.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Of course,
Truvada is for those who are
uninfected. Keeping those who
are infected healthy and linked
to care is another main thrust
of San Francisco's plan.
Max Ruben works for San
Francisco's Public Health
Department. For months, he's
been making
regular visits to see an
HIV-positive man named Barry
Stover.
MAX RUBEN, San Francisco Public
Health Department: Barry.
Morning, bud. How's it going?
BARRY STOVER, HIV Patient: I
found out I had HIV. I was ready
to kill myself, but I didn't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Stover was
diagnosed in 2015 after years of
living on the streets,
addicted to drugs. He's still
using today, and the first few
times we met him, he was
supposed to be taking his daily
HIV medications, but it wasn't
clear that was happening.
BARRY STOVER: I try to take 'em,
but I just don't like taking
pills.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After their
visit, Ruben walked Stover to
one of the city's health
clinics. With regular visits,
they hope he will be more
consistent with his medications.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: No one is
proposing that every single
person with HIV gets a daily
visit. However, if we want to
fully control the epidemic, we
are going to need to do that
for some people, and it's
completely justified. It's
either pay now or pay later.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A few blocks
away, Kenneth Grosenbach and his
girlfriend Michele Campbell
are trying to stay on their
medications as well.
He's HIV-positive. She isn't.
Because he's taking his meds,
she's far less likely to
get infected. She's also taking
PrEP, which gives her even more
protection.
It's hard to convey just how
brutal Kenny Grosenbach's life
has been so far. Born to
a teenage rape victim, he was
abandoned when he was 10. He
says he's been selling sex and
addicted to drugs for the last
20 years Grosenbach admits he's
had trouble in the past staying
on his HIV medication, but now
he says he's got a reason to
stay alive.
KENNETH GROSENBACH, HIV Patient:
What encouraged me to get my
medicine, and start my medicine,
is that I found somebody that I
really care about. I found
somebody that cares about me.
MICHELE CAMPBELL, San Francisco:
Now that we're together and we
want to start a normal
life, we need to start
doing normal things.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To stop the
AIDS epidemic, two years ago,
the U.N. set an ambitious goal,
and it's one that we're seeing
implemented here in San
Francisco. It's to get 90
percent
of HIV-positive people tested,
90 percent of them onto
treatment, and 90 percent of
them to have their virus
fully suppressed.
Whether that's achievable and
whether that'll stem the
epidemic is still an open
question.
The challenge of hitting those
targets became clearer when we
returned to the city three
months later.
WOMAN: What is the reason to
see the pharmacist tomorrow?
KENNETH GROSENBACH: Because I
have zero medicines. Yes, I need
my medicine.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kenny
Grosenbach is now homeless. He'd
just been kicked out of his
place, and he stopped
taking his HIV medication.
KENNETH GROSENBACH: I have to
say that these few months have
been hard. I went completely
backwards. I am not really being
too much on the responsible end
for my meds or for
my relationship. I am just
trying to make it day by day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: "Science"
magazine's Jon Cohen, who's
covered HIV/AIDS for more than
25 years, and who helped us
report this series, says Kenny
Grosenbach is a testament to
just
how hard it's going to be to
achieve the U.N.'s targets.
JON COHEN, "Science": Who are
these people who are so hard to
test, who are so hard to
link to care, and who are so
hard to get suppressed? Kenny's
that guy.
He's really tough on every level
for the health care system. He
knows his status. Linking
him to care, he's been linked to
care, but keeping him virally
suppressed? Well, he has
a really hard time staying on
his medication. And it ties back
to housing, right? I mean,
this is a guy who's
living on the streets.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But for most
people, the Getting to Zero
campaign has been working.
This summer, six months after we
first met him, Jason Lloyd was
still taking the PrEP
drug, Truvada. He said some of
his friends take it, too. They
help remind him to take
his, and it's all becoming very
normal-seeming. We caught up
with him as he was getting made
up for one of his drag
performances. His stage name is
Beyonda, Beyonda Mazing.
And contrary to the critics'
fears about taking Truvada, the
pill hadn't turned him into a
wild risk-taker. In fact, he'd
been having a bit of a dry
spell.
JASON LLOYD: I'm actually having
less sex since I started taking
Truvada than before.
Yes, I feel more like a Truvada
monk than a Truvada whore.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Luis Canales
has also been taking his
medication consistently, and
he's
had no side effects.
LUIS CANALES: Meds every day.
Whenever any of my doctors need
to see me, I go in and
see them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Partly because
of how quickly he was put on
treatment, extensive tests
cannot
find the virus anywhere in his
body. And doctors are now
studying him to see if they can
learn
any clues about how
to cure people.
And across town at Barry
Stover's place, more good news.
After struggling to stick with
his meds, Stover's
been doing it.
BARRY STOVER: I'm
undetectable, so...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
You're undetectable?
BARRY STOVER: Yes. That's what
-- what my doctor said, so...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Congratulations.
BARRY STOVER: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
That's a big deal.
BARRY STOVER: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But things
just keep spiraling down for
Kenny Grosenbach and Michele
Campbell.
They are both homeless now. She
was kicked out of her place. And
both are completely
off their medications.
HIV is likely replicating
rapidly in Kenny's immune cells,
and because Campbell is off
Truvada, she's at high
risk of infection.
They said the main thing they
focus on now is their addiction.
MICHELE CAMPBELL: It seems like
since we have been out on the
streets. Getting high has
been, like, the priority, just
because we just forget about
everything else.
KENNETH GROSENBACH: You
don't have to feel at all.
MICHELE CAMPBELL: I really just
want to get off the drugs, and
start taking medication,
and start living our life and
actually be happy, because this
is miserable out here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: San Francisco
is still a few years away from
its Getting to Zero target.
Despite the struggles they face,
Dr. Diane Havlir remains
optimistic they will get there.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: The worst
thing that you can do is fail,
but, if you don't try at all,
you're never going to have the
chance of succeeding. So,
obstacles and barriers for me
are just
part of the journey
and don't deter me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even as the
city cheers its advances, the
difficulty of bringing the
AIDS epidemic to
an end is obvious.
Public health officials say,
after nearly 35 years since the
epidemic surfaced, the
world has never had this many
proven tools so close at hand to
fight HIV. But putting
those tools to work for everyone
remains the challenge going
forward.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in San
Francisco.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tough to watch.
We continue our series tomorrow
looking at the challenges in
Atlanta, where black gay
men are among the hardest-hit.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The alarm
bells rarely stop in the
inpatient and isolation wards at
Grady
Memorial Hospital. Here in
Atlanta, just down the street
from CDC, in 2016, in the age of
lifesaving antiretroviral drugs,
hundreds of people are still
dying every year from
AIDS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in all this
week for our series The End of
AIDS.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: Iconic images
and stories of the Dust
Bowl have helped shape our
perceptions of that period of
American history, but a new
study challenges our
understanding of all that
followed.
That and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in later
tonight on "Charlie Rose":
columnist Charles Blow on
how events in Dallas have
affected the issues of race and
reform.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.